"Namaskar. Today we are talking on diabetes. Diabetes is a degenerative disease. It is. Going to affect the whole system, every organ of our body suffers because of diabetes. There are two types of diabetes. One when you are born with that, juvenile. And you can't do anything except supplying insulin to your body. So, every time insulin shots are given or this is the only management. Other type of diabetes is called a stress diabetes. That's the diabetes which comes after the age of 30, 40, 50, and so on. Where our life style is very much responsible we somehow live a life which is more stressful life. We are having a long sitting and so many wrong things. We do, alcohol, smoking and so on and the whole body suffers because of that diabetes sets in. So, let's understand what we should do regularly. To Prevent and to manage diabetes. First is walking. We believe a lot yogis would always say that person should be walking. Morning 45 minutes of walk and evening half an hour of walk is a must. It would keep person healthy. In the House also, instead of sitting for long or in the office sitting for long, very often every one hour just little bit move, walk. Don't stay in one position. It would help cardiac patients also and diabetic patients also. Second extremities exercise exercises where you have to give something circulation to your extremities. So whenever possible, sit with legs up, cross legs that would help. Even on chair, put one leg up another leg up. And see that you are flexible in your limbs. But there is an aasan which is called as utkatasana in yoga. So here keep your feet little away from each other. 1 foot distance parallel. While inhaling, I raise your both arms up simultaneously raise on your toe. Your heels are up. While exhaling squat down slowly slowly and squat down completely. So your heels are up your only on toe. So your entire extremities attended. Then while inhaling come up again. On your toe and exhaling come back to your normal position. Well, heals are also on the ground. So, this is utkatasana repeat again, inhale raise on your toe. exhaling squat down. Stay for 4 seconds, inhaling again come back to your normal position. And exiling come back with your feet firm on the ground. In a day whenever possible, sitting down, squatting down and getting up also should be a habit of diabetics second posture. We'll do chakrasan. Here. Legs one foot away from each other. While inhaling, stretch your arms. Take it up and go back. Bend back. While exhaling come forward. Try and touch your both palms to the ground or how much it is possible, do it. Stay in this position as far as possible. Let the head go into. And while inhaling, come back again to the straight position. Rotate your arms. And come back to normal position while exhaling. Do this again. Inhale. Raise your arms up and back. Your spine is bending back. Exhaling, you are bending forward. Holding the breath over there. Good circulation on face. Neck back everything is helpful, healthier. Come back up. And come to the normal position. Now, we would sit on the floor. Stretch legs. Fold one leg. Fold another leg as shown. We are doing Ardha Matsyendrasan. And try and fix your arm taking the knee from the side. And twist your body behind. You have to observe how the model is doing and do it. This twisting really helps in opening up. All that's nerves which are compressed otherwise in between vertebrae. Come back to normal position. Change your leg position to go on the other side. So again, fold your leg. Hold the other leg over it. Take the arm rotate it from behind to hold your toe. Try and twist. So you are looking back. Giving a pressure. Stay there. Come back to normal position. Ardha Matsyendrasan. Slowly, by practice you will be able to do it. Now we will do what's called as paschimottanasana. Here. You have to stretch your legs straight sitting. Give some pressure at the abdominal region. Abdominal pressure is very much required for diabetics. Twisting abdominal pressure now this also abdominal pressure. So inhale. Fold your hands to the at the opposite side of your chest. While exhaling Stecher arms straight? Bend forward. Hold your big toe. Text your head to your knee. Stay for some time. And come back to normal position. If you find the posture is too difficult first do rowing pose, so inhale, bring your arms to the side of your chest exhale bend forward. Try to touch your toe. Again, come back inhaling again, exhaling stretch legs. So, this is how you go on doing till you feel comfortable to finally hold your toe and touch your knee to the ground. So try and do this gradually and this would benefit because this helps the whole body complete body exercise. It is now. Let's lie down. Lying down. Try and lift your one leg while exhaling and fold your knee while exhaling towards your stomach. You are clasping arm. You are pressing your knee so that you are really presses your stomach. It's a gentle stomach pressure. Inhale, make your arm straight and come back. Try to do it on the left side left leg. Lift and fold while exhaling. Hold it for some time. Inhaling, stretch your legs, exhaling come down. Now the same thing you can do with both the legs. So while exhaling, lift and fold. Clasp. And while inhaling. Make your legs straight and come down. So this is called as pavanmuktasana. And this should be done after three hours of your meal. Do it with empty stomach or I would put it like that before your food. Do this and then eat your food. Now. We should know how to relax our abdomen and for that there's one simple pranayama. Which every human should do. Everybody should master this. Where you are lying down. Your legs are folded. You are, totally relax when your legs are folded, your spine is totally relax. Keep your one arm on your stomach. And now concentrate on your breath while breathing in. Lift your stomach up. While breathing down, bring it. Sync it down. Inhaling stomach moves little up. Exiling stomach moves in words. Inhaling up. Exhaling in. Go on doing this for some time. You need not push your stomach too much up. Do it naturally Exhale. Let it sink in. And when you are relaxed, stomach really sinks in. That would help relaxing the abdominal area. And relaxing generally the whole body, your nervous system and this would do tremendous good. Now let's sit and do a pranayama. Which is called as bhastrika pranayam. Sit in any meditative pose. Either in Sukhasan or in Padmasana. Sitting in that post now focus on the abdominal movement as well as on your breath. So the rule is very much clear when you breathe in stomach moves up when you breathe out, stomach goes in. So do this with little force. The sound should come from your nostril. With force you are inhaling an exactly. And along with it. Like stomach is moving up and down. So do this bhastrika pranayam breathe in. Breathe out. Stomach in. Breathe in, breathe out, breathe in, breathe out. This is how you should go about. Take 30 rounds of this breathing. And once thirty rounds are over, take a long inhalation. Fill your chest completely. And hold your breathe. And now breathe out and relax. Don't do at a time. More than 30 rounds. So now relax a bit, then do it again, bhastrika. Breathe in, breathe out within, breathe out with friction at the nasal passage, 30 rounds. And then inhale fully. Hold your breath. And then relax. All this together. Would work wonders. Ultimately, in diabetes, person has to understand that diabetic people are very perfectionists, so they should try and do their job perfectly. There is no problem about it, but when others don't do it perfectly, don't get disturbed. Don't get upset about it because that disturbance causes total chaos in the system. So learn to accept people as they are, love them as they are, appreciate them as they are. Be happy. Namaste."