yogatest1.wav	very much responsible we somehow live a life which is more stressful life. We are having a long sitting and so many wrong things. We do, alcohol, smoking and so on and the whole body suffers because of that diabetes sets in. So, let's understand what we should do regularly. To Prevent and to manage diabetes. First is walking. We believe a lot yogis would always say that person should be walking. Morning 45 minutes of walk and evening half an hour of walk is a must. It would keep person healthy. In the House also, instead of sitting for long or in the office sitting for long, very often every one hour just little bit move, walk. Don't stay in one position. It would help cardiac patients also and diabetic patients also. Second extremities exercise exercises where you have to give something circulation to your extremities. So whenever possible, sit with legs up, cross legs that would help. Even on chair, put one leg up another leg up. And see that you are flexible in your limbs. But there is an aasan which is called as utkatasana in yoga. So here keep your feet little away from each other. 1 foot distance parallel. While inhaling, I raise your both arms up simultaneously raise on your toe. Your heels are up. While exhaling squat down slowly slowly and squat
yogatest2.wav	Here. Legs one foot away from each other. While inhaling, stretch your arms. Take it up and go back. Bend back. While exhaling come forward. Try and touch your both palms to the ground or how much it is possible, do it. Stay in this position as far as possible. Let the head go into. And while inhaling, come back again to the straight position. Rotate your arms. And come back to normal position while exhaling. Do this again. Inhale. Raise your arms up and back. Your spine is bending back. Exhaling, you are bending forward. Holding the breath over there. Good circulation on face. Neck back everything is helpful, healthier. Come back up. And come to the normal position. Now, we would sit on the floor. Stretch legs. Fold one leg. Fold another leg as shown. We are doing Ardha Matsyendrasan. And try and fix your arm taking the knee from the side. And twist your body behind. You have to observe how the model is doing
yogatest3.wav	Here. You have to stretch your legs straight sitting. Give some pressure at the abdominal region. Abdominal pressure is very much required for diabetics. Twisting abdominal pressure now this also abdominal pressure. So inhale. Fold your hands to the at the opposite side of your chest. While exhaling Stecher arms straight? Bend forward. Hold your big toe. Text your head to your knee. Stay for some time. And come back to normal position. If you find the posture is too difficult first do rowing pose, so inhale, bring your arms to the side of your chest exhale bend forward. Try to touch your toe. Again, come back inhaling again, exhaling stretch legs. So, this is how you go on doing till you feel comfortable to finally hold your toe and touch your knee to the ground. So try and do this gradually and this would benefit because this helps the whole body complete body exercise. It is now. Let's lie down. Lying down. Try and lift your one leg while exhaling and fold your knee while exhaling towards your stomach. You are clasping arm. You are pressing your knee so that you